This was the era of Bourbaki, a mathematical “club” that, like Dada in art or Existentialism in literature, spread from France to become, for a time, hugely influential on the world stage. It worshipped abstraction and math for math’s sake; it scorned pragmatism, applications, or math as a tool for science. It was the dogma of French mathematics, and a reason why I ultimately left Paris for IBM. I was a young rebel, much to my uncle’s consternation. While working towards my doctorate, I would often stop by his office at the end of the day for a chat; it often turned to debate. One day, facing the long, dull Metro ride home, I asked him what he could suggest for me to read. He reached into his wastebasket, and pulled out a discarded reprint. “This is for you. That’s the kind of silly stuff you like,” he said. It was a review of a book by an academic “character,” George Kingsley Zipf. Zipf, independently wealthy, was a university lecturer at Harvard in a self-invented field he called statistical human ecology. His book, Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort, saw power laws as an omnipresent pattern in the social sciences. Such power laws are common in physics, and are a form of what I now call fractal scaling. Seismologists have a mathematical formula that shows the number of earthquakes varying by a power law with their intensity, on the famous Richter scale. Put another way: Small quakes are common while big ones are rare, with a precise formula relating intensity to frequency. But at that time only a few examples were known—to very few persons. Zipf, an encyclopedist obsessed by an idée fixe , claimed that power laws do not occur only in physical sciences but are the rule in all manner of human behavior, organization, and anatomy—even in the size of sexual organs. Most fortunately, the book review my uncle gave me limited itself to one unusually elaborate example: word frequencies. In text or speech, some words such as “the” or “this” occur often; others, “milreis” or “momus,” appear rarely if ever (for the curious: the first is an old Portuguese coin, the second a synonym for critic). Here was Zipf’s game: Pick a text and count how many times each word appears in it. Then give each word a rank: 1 for the most common word, 2 for the second-most common word, and so on. Finally, graph the number of times each word appears against its rank. A surprising pattern emerges. The curve does not fall smoothly from most common to least common word. It plunges